Integration with OS Running on the Firewall Machine
====================================================

.. sectnum::
   :start: 12

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2


FirewallFabrik generates firewall scripts for iptables and nftables tailored for integration with modern Linux systems running systemd. The generated script supports command-line arguments ``start``, ``stop``, ``status``, ``block``, ``reload``, ``interfaces``, and ``test_interfaces``. The script can be integrated with systemd using a custom service unit.

The iptables script is assembled from configlets located in ``resources/configlets/linux24/`` (starting from ``script_skeleton``). The nftables script is rendered from the Jinja2 template ``resources/templates/nftables/script.sh.j2``. You can modify both following the instructions in :doc:`13 - Configlets`.


Activating the Firewall Policy at Boot
---------------------------------------

The recommended way to activate the FirewallFabrik-generated policy at boot is to create a systemd service unit. This applies to both iptables and nftables firewalls.


Creating a systemd Service Unit
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create a service unit file that runs the generated firewall script at boot. The default output file name is ``fwf.sh``, stored in ``/etc/``. You can change both in the firewall settings dialog (``Compiler > Output file name`` and ``Installer > Directory on firewall``).

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo $EDITOR /etc/systemd/system/firewallfabrik.service

Add the following content (adjust the script path if you changed the defaults):

.. code-block:: ini

   [Unit]
   Description=FirewallFabrik firewall policy
   DefaultDependencies=no
   Before=network-pre.target
   Wants=network-pre.target
   After=local-fs.target

   [Service]
   Type=oneshot
   RemainAfterExit=yes
   ExecStart=/etc/fwf.sh start
   ExecStop=/etc/fwf.sh stop
   ExecReload=/etc/fwf.sh reload

   [Install]
   WantedBy=multi-user.target

Enable and start the service:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo systemctl daemon-reload
   sudo systemctl enable firewallfabrik.service
   sudo systemctl start firewallfabrik.service


Disabling Conflicting Services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using FirewallFabrik to manage the firewall, disable any distribution-provided firewall services to avoid conflicts:

.. code-block:: bash

   # RHEL / Fedora / CentOS -- disable firewalld
   sudo systemctl disable --now firewalld

   # Debian / Ubuntu -- disable ufw
   sudo systemctl disable --now ufw

   # If nftables.service is active and you use FirewallFabrik for nftables
   sudo systemctl disable --now nftables

.. note::

   The script generated by FirewallFabrik does more than just set iptables or nftables rules. It also adds virtual IP addresses to the interfaces of the firewall, configures kernel parameters, and can check whether interfaces are present and up. Distribution-provided ``iptables-save``/``iptables-restore`` services only manage rules; other tasks performed by the FirewallFabrik-generated script will not be done upon reboot if you rely on those services.


Coexistence with Docker, CrowdSec, fail2ban and Other Tools
------------------------------------------------------------

By default, the generated firewall script flushes **all** rules before loading the new policy. This guarantees a clean, deterministic firewall state — FirewallFabrik controls the entire host firewall.

On servers running Docker, CrowdSec, fail2ban or similar tools, this full flush destroys the rules those tools manage. To avoid this, disable the **"Flush entire ruleset"** option in the firewall settings dialog. FirewallFabrik then only manages its own tables and chains, leaving everything else untouched.

Both platforms support this coexistence mode:

* **nftables**: FirewallFabrik creates named tables (e.g. ``fwf_filter``, ``fwf_nat``). Only these tables are deleted and recreated. Other tools' tables (e.g. Docker's ``table ip docker``, CrowdSec's ``table inet crowdsec``) remain untouched.
* **iptables**: FirewallFabrik creates prefixed chains (e.g. ``fwf_INPUT``, ``fwf_FORWARD``, ``fwf_OUTPUT``) and inserts jump rules into the built-in chains. Only the prefixed chains are flushed on reload.

The table/chain prefix is configurable via **"Table name"** in the firewall settings dialog (default: ``fwf``).

.. warning::

   Disabling "Flush entire ruleset" means FirewallFabrik no longer controls the entire firewall. Other tools may add rules that bypass your policy. Only disable this if you need coexistence with other tools on the same machine.


Controlling Rule Evaluation Order (iptables)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When multiple tools manage iptables chains, the **evaluation order** depends on the **systemd startup order**. Each tool inserts its jump rules at position 1 (top of the built-in chain) using ``iptables -I``. Tools that start later end up at the top, so their rules are evaluated first.

For a typical setup with FirewallFabrik, Docker, CrowdSec and fail2ban, configure the systemd unit to start FirewallFabrik **before** the other tools:

.. code-block:: ini

   [Unit]
   Description=FirewallFabrik firewall policy
   DefaultDependencies=no
   Wants=network-pre.target
   After=local-fs.target

   # Start before network and before other tools so the machine
   # is protected as early as possible. Tools that start later
   # insert their rules at position 1 (evaluated first).
   Before=network-pre.target docker.service crowdsec.service fail2ban.service

   [Service]
   Type=oneshot
   RemainAfterExit=yes
   ExecStart=/etc/fwf.sh start
   ExecStop=/etc/fwf.sh stop
   ExecReload=/etc/fwf.sh reload

   [Install]
   WantedBy=multi-user.target

This produces the following evaluation order in the INPUT chain:

.. code-block:: text

   Position 1:  -j f2b-sshd         (fail2ban — started last)
   Position 2:  -j CROWDSEC_CHAIN   (CrowdSec)
   Position 3:  -j fwf_INPUT        (FirewallFabrik — started first)
   Built-in policy: DROP

Packets flow top-to-bottom. CrowdSec and fail2ban see each packet **before** FirewallFabrik's rules. If neither blocks the packet, FirewallFabrik's policy decides. If none of the chains match, the built-in DROP policy applies.

This is typically the desired order: CrowdSec blocklists and fail2ban bans are checked first, then the firewall policy applies.

.. note::

   nftables uses table priorities instead of insertion order, so the systemd ordering is less critical there. FirewallFabrik's named tables use the default ``filter`` priority.


Restarting the Policy when an Interface Address Changes
-------------------------------------------------------

The firewall policy script generated by FirewallFabrik determines the IP addresses of all dynamic interfaces and assigns them to variables, which it then uses in the policy rules. If an interface's address changes after the policy has been loaded, the firewall script needs to be restarted.

On modern systems using NetworkManager, you can use a dispatcher script:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo $EDITOR /etc/NetworkManager/dispatcher.d/99-firewallfabrik

Add the following content:

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash
   # Restart FirewallFabrik policy when an interface gets a new address
   if [ "$2" = "up" ] || [ "$2" = "dhcp4-change" ] || [ "$2" = "dhcp6-change" ]; then
       systemctl reload firewallfabrik.service 2>/dev/null || true
   fi

Make the script executable:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo chmod +x /etc/NetworkManager/dispatcher.d/99-firewallfabrik

For systems using systemd-networkd instead of NetworkManager, create a networkd-dispatcher script in ``/etc/networkd-dispatcher/routable.d/`` with similar content.

For PPP connections (e.g. PPPoE), the ``/etc/ppp/ip-up`` script can be used to restart the firewall:

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash
   systemctl reload firewallfabrik.service

.. note::

   Replace ``firewallfabrik.service`` with the actual service name if you chose a different name for the unit file.


Deploying with Configuration Management
----------------------------------------

In modern infrastructure, firewall policies are often deployed as part of an automated workflow rather than manually. The generated ``.fw`` script fits naturally into configuration management tools.


Ansible
~~~~~~~

An Ansible playbook to deploy a FirewallFabrik-generated policy might look like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   ---
   - name: Deploy firewall policy
     hosts: firewalls
     become: true
     tasks:
       - name: Copy firewall script
         ansible.builtin.copy:
           src: "output/{{ inventory_hostname }}.fw"
           dest: /etc/firewall/{{ inventory_hostname }}.fw
           owner: root
           group: root
           mode: '0700'
         notify: Activate firewall

       - name: Ensure systemd service exists
         ansible.builtin.copy:
           src: firewallfabrik.service
           dest: /etc/systemd/system/firewallfabrik.service
           owner: root
           group: root
           mode: '0644'
         notify:
           - Reload systemd
           - Activate firewall

       - name: Enable firewall service
         ansible.builtin.systemd:
           name: firewallfabrik
           enabled: true
           daemon_reload: true

     handlers:
       - name: Reload systemd
         ansible.builtin.systemd:
           daemon_reload: true

       - name: Activate firewall
         ansible.builtin.systemd:
           name: firewallfabrik
           state: reloaded

This approach ensures that the firewall script is deployed consistently across all machines and activated in a controlled manner.


CI/CD Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For teams using a CI/CD pipeline, the typical workflow is:

1. Edit the firewall policy in the FirewallFabrik GUI.
2. Save and compile the policy (``Rules > Compile``).
3. Commit the ``.fwf`` source file and the generated ``.fw`` script(s) to Git.
4. A CI/CD pipeline (GitLab CI, GitHub Actions, Jenkins, etc.) picks up the change and runs the deployment playbook or script.

Example GitLab CI stage:

.. code-block:: yaml

   deploy-firewall:
     stage: deploy
     script:
       - ansible-playbook -i inventory deploy-firewall.yml
     only:
       changes:
         - output/*.fw
     when: manual

The ``when: manual`` gate ensures that firewall deployments are always explicitly triggered by an operator.

See :doc:`10 - Compiling and Installing a Policy` for details on compiling policies.
